No better person to kick off our
coverage this morning at the Bund Summit
here on the banks of the Huangpu River
in Shanghai and the financial district
across the river is Stephen Roach. He's
a Yale Law School senior fellow, also of
course the former chairman of Morgan
Stanley Asia. Thanks so much for having
you.
>> Cheers Steve. Glad to be here. I mean,
I'm sure you have lots at the forefront
of your mind right now, but let's talk
about the upcoming possible Xi-Trump uh
meeting on the sidelines of APEC. How
high are your hopes for that to kind of
stabilize the relationship? Because
again, Donald Trump is threatening
tariffs upwards of 155%
because they can't seem to find ground
while they're while they're trying to
find leverage. They can't seem to find
ground on certain export controls.
Well, you know, leader-leader summits
are always important
in terms of the the cosmetics. Uh
the press and media coverage, but they
rarely accomplish little. I've studied
them
uh back to uh the first summits with Mao
and Nixon. We've had 22 major
leader-leader summits
uh between the US and China since then.
I'd say two or three of them have been
you know, major uh world-moving events.
The rest have been blah, including the
last one between Biden and Xi Jinping in
uh in San Francisco. So, I would I don't
expect much, but I you know, I think
it's good that the the two leaders will
meet. Do you think What do you think
could move the needle though? Obviously,
they're both sides are building leverage
for which they could possibly make
concessions, whether it's soybean
purchases from the United States. Might
be too late already. The crop is the
harvest is deep into the the the season.
Uh but also of course rare earth and
then semiconductors on the other side.
Well, I think you know, what we'll most
likely see, you know, is another taco
move on the trade threat from uh
President Trump. He's done it once
before. There's no reason to think uh he
won't do it again and he's already
alluded to the fact that, you know, he's
probably going to
uh fall back from his threat of an
additional 100% on top of the
pre-existing 30 to 50. He may can't
really make up his mind on
what that is, but um
you know, China's got some powerful
strategic options that it has deployed
recently. Most importantly, uh I think
the the the rare earths uh export
controls that they've imposed, which is
really causing
potential pressures on global supply
chains and on US manufacturing. Did the
US underestimate the bargaining chips
that China actually does have coming
into this uh second major trade war
between Trump and Xi, if you will? You
can call it that. Well, I I think the US
has always underestimated China's
bargaining chips. We view uh in the
United States as uh
a a relationship that's a one-way
dependency, that China depends on us and
we don't depend on China. I've written
two books. I'm actually starting a third
on codependency where we both depend
equally on each other and I think China
is demonstrating
uh the two-way nature of this important
economic uh and uh security
relationship. Yeah. Six months into, you
know, since Liberation Day and the
launch of all these tariffs,
what What does your research tell you
that the net impact has been on the US
economy? We're baking in already a
couple of Fed cuts.
Uh
Where's the inflation spectrum going to
be as we keep on going down this road?
Well, I look back and well, you know,
what I wrote on Liberation Day and the
actual
uh impacts have been slower and more
gradual to occur than I and most others
thought. Uh but there are clear signs of
um
uh goods inflation
uh especially in in certain categories
like uh furniture
uh and some consumer appliances where
price increases are being uh picking up
due to tariffs. And I think what I would
take away from this experience post uh
Liberation Day is the the impact is
slower,
uh albeit it's still in the in the
direction that most of us had expected.
You care to weigh in at all what your
op-ed uh highlighted and that is the
damage that potentially is happening to
the US because of the executive order
process as the tariffs have been
executive orders and not through
the two chambers of Congress and what
that is necessarily doing to undermine
American legitimacy.
Well, I think what you're referring to
is I I wrote an article several months
ago called America's Cultural Revolution
that uh was pretty controversial and got
a lot of pushback from my former friends
in the United States. Uh they said, "How
dare you compare this
to the most wrenching social and
political upheaval the world has seen."
My point is revolutions are relative
compared to pre-existing norms uh in any
system. And compared to the norms that
we've had in the United States uh prior
to Trump 1 and especially Trump 2.0,
this is a dramatic shift from the
standpoint of executive overreach, from
the standpoint of uh trade policy, from
the standpoint of our alliances with the
rest of the world. And that's an
important point that I would you know,
like to stress here. Unlike China's
Cultural Revolution, which had no impact
on the broader world because China was a
tiny isolated economy,
uh America's upheaval will have a major
global impact because of our role in the
world. Do you find that China though has
weathered this turmoil fairly well or
better than in the past uh because
they've found their bargaining chips,
whether it's rare earths and magnets and
they've built up their own domestic AI
industry and they're they're developing
their own AI chips. They're buying
soybeans from Argentina and Brazil, not
the United States. They've built in
those buffers, but they have troubles.
They have three consecutive years of
deflation. There's a race to the bottom.
Some call it Huang Yiping, who we'll
talk to later, says it's a rat race to
the bottom. So, they have this struct
some structural issues. How do you see
and the the need for the priorities
shift in this next five-year plan, which
the top Beijing leaders are concocting
right now to boost consumption to
you know, bring the imbalances back a
little bit lower.
>> area I've been focusing on for longer
than I care to remember and it's more
urgent now because of many of the
structural problems you just alluded to,
Steve. The the property sector, for
example, is dead money for the
foreseeable future. Exports are booming,
but you know, the world is uh pushing
back
uh
even
uh you know, outside of the US. I think
there's a protectionist backlash and
you wonder how much China can continue
to diversify away. The investment
sector, which has been booming, is now,
you know, 40% of GDP. How much higher
can it go? So, they need a new source of
growth and the Chinese consumer is that
source. They've been talking about that
since 2007. I've written about it since
then myself. And uh you know, the debate
is endless. It's tedious. And I think
they have to be much more aggressive in
establishing a target for what they're
trying to achieve uh in the upcoming
15th five-year plan.
>> They want a target that they can reach
and you're saying about 50% uh household
contribution to GDP. Yeah, I'm saying
they need to have an explicit target of
boosting household uh household
consumption share of GDP from currently
around 40 to 50 by 2035. And the Chinese
are good at hitting targets. They can do
it. They just have to figure out a way
to do it.
>> Last question since we're in Shanghai
here. Um there's been a lot of talk
obviously globally about uh maybe
there's this trend
towards de-dollarization, but very
difficult to do. Are there any
particular steps that you think we
should be watching out for from China or
that they've already done with
cross-border agreements and swaps and
the like to get the RMB to be more
international? And how do you see
Shanghai and Hong Kong playing those
>> had for a number of years, but what's
different about it is that the dollar is
now under significant downward pressure
uh for many of the reasons that we were
just alluding to
uh in the United States. The executive
overreach, uh the open-ended deficit
spending, the high levels of US debt, uh
and uh the shortfall of domestic saving,
which leads you to big current account
balances. So, there is some gradual
diversification. The question has always
been, "If you don't like the dollar,
where do you go?"
Uh and uh you know, the RMB is still
small in terms of its global presence,
but the Chinese are putting a lot of
pieces together that will probably make
the RMB more attractive over a longer
period of time as a global reserve
currency. Can they do it though with the
closed capital account?
>> No, they have to open the capital
account uh and um you know, they have to
continue to build
uh the the capital reform infrastructure
uh in in China. They've made a lot of
steps, especially in the equity market,
but uh you know, they've got a lot of
work to do in terms of international uh
currency markets. Stephen Roach, always
great. Thanks for kicking off our
coverage here at the Bund Summit in
Shanghai. Thank you, Steve.
>> be a stranger, sir. Have fun.